---
title: "SAT encodings for Pseudo-Boolean constraints together with at-most-one constraints"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-10-11-pbamo-aij
excerpt: >
  A thorough presentation of SAT encodings for pseudo-boolean constraints
  optimised for the existence of at-most-one constraints on the variables in
  their scope.  The first paper I was able to contribute to during my PhD.
date: 2021-10-11
venue: 'Artificial Intelligence'
paperurl: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2021.103604
citation: >
  Miquel Bofill, Jordi Coll, Peter Nightingale, Josep Suy, Felix Ulrich-Oltean,
  Mateu Villaret, "SAT encodings for Pseudo-Boolean constraints together with
  at-most-one constraints", Artificial Intelligence, Volume 302, 2022, 103604,
  ISSN 0004-3702.
---

When solving a combinatorial problem using propositional satisfiability (SAT),
the encoding of the problem is of vital importance. We study encodings of
Pseudo-Boolean (PB) constraints, a common type of arithmetic constraint that
appears in a wide variety of combinatorial problems such as timetabling,
scheduling, and resource allocation. In some cases PB constraints occur together
with at-most-one (AMO) constraints over subsets of their variables (forming
PB(AMO) constraints). Recent work has shown that taking account of AMOs when
encoding PB constraints using decision diagrams can produce a dramatic
improvement in solver efficiency. In this paper we extend the approach to other
state-of-the-art encodings of PB constraints, developing several new encodings
for PB(AMO) constraints. Also, we present a more compact and efficient version
of the popular Generalized Totalizer encoding, named Reduced Generalized
Totalizer. This new encoding is also adapted for PB(AMO) constraints for a
further gain. Our experiments show that the encodings of PB(AMO) constraints can
be substantially smaller than those of PB constraints. PB(AMO) encodings allow
many more instances to be solved within a time limit, and solving time is
improved by more than one order of magnitude in some cases. We also observed
that there is no single overall winner among the considered encodings, but
efficiency of each encoding may depend on PB(AMO) characteristics such as the
magnitude of coefficient values.
