---
title: "Verifying Properties of State-Based Models Using Constraint Programming"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2026-05-verify
excerpt: >
  We used constraint programming to complement existing verification methods, being able to tackle
  much larger instances of some problems.
date: 2026-05-22
venue: Rigorous State-Based Methods: 12th International Conference (ABZ 2026)
paperurl:  https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/id/eprint/239752/
citation: >
  Victoria Johnson, Pedro Ribeiro, Simon Foster, Peter Nightingale, Felix
  Ulrich-Oltean, "Verifying Properties of State-Based Models Using Constraint
  Programming", Rigorous State-Based Methods: 12th International Conference (ABZ
  2026), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-032-26752-8_6
---

We explore the application of Constraint Programming (CP) tools to modelling
state-based systems and verifying their properties. This includes finding
execution traces leading to a particular state, and proving deadlock-freedom up
to a given bound on the number of transitions. We present three distinct case
studies. The first formulates a railway signal in the Essence CP modelling
language, demonstrating use of Essence types and operators to model states,
transitions, and invariants, in a system with a single finite-state
automaton. The second case study is based on Dining Philosophers, and
demonstrates effective CP modelling of a system with a large number of automata,
synchronised on transitions. The third case study is part of the Alpha
Algorithm, an example from swarm robotics. It introduces a clock, and has
transitions with guards that refer to the clock. It also has triggers,
representing sensor inputs, and non-deterministic waits, demonstrating that
these concepts can be represented in a CP model. Finally we demonstrate that the
CP approach is complementary to a model checking approach using FDR4. In many
cases the CP approach can scale substantially better than the model checker,
despite the CP toolchain being general-purpose, i.e. not explicitly designed for
verifying properties of state-based models.
